# Materials Energy Toxicity Matrix

Designing out waste matrix template.

Thanks to [ThingsCon 2018](thingscon2018.productscience.net) and [@mrchrisadams](https://twitter.com/mrchrisadams) excellent talk on [Reducing Carbon In the Digital Realm](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1_uTPiW5aMCwFhZcpLDxjY-AQMgDmHIyUEZQQ-G6XXq8/edit#slide=id.g5d9e2f62d2_0_42) at [Festival of Maintenance](https://festivalofmaintenance.org.uk)

|ThingsCon 2018<br>Designing out Waste<br>Based on the MET Matrix from<br>TU Delft Design Guide|Extraction of Raw Materials|Design & Production|Packaging & Distribution|Use & Maintenance|End of life Disposal|
---|---|---|---|---|---
**Materials**<br> Material as an input<br>mined, grown, harvested)|*What are the materials used?*|*What processes are used to make it?*|*What kind of packaging is used for the item and in transit?*|*What consumables are used by the product?*<br>*What is needed to keep it working?*|Which bits can be recycled? Are their local recirculation schemes for them?
**Energy**<br>Energy used in each stage<br>as an input|*How much energy is used to get the materials you use?*<br>*How did they get to the point of assembly?<br>How far did they travel?*|*How much energy does the manufacturing use?*|*How easy is it to transport? How does it travel? Where does it go?*|*How much power does it use? How much energy is used to clean and service it?*|*How much energy is used to treat the product or prepare for re-use?*
**Toxicity**<br>Emissions, effluent & waste as an output|*What are the waste products in extracting the material?<br>Where do they go?*|*What happens to the waste materials? How much is created? Can it be safely used elsewhere? Are their toxic emissions associated with Production*|*What is emitted by methods of transport? What happens tobr> packaging afterwards?*|*Where do the consumables go after use? Is the product itself toxic to use over long periods?*|*Which bits cannot be recycled? What happens if the product is not treated correctly at end of life?*
**Labour Relations**<br>What are labor relations like?<br>|Who is doing the Extracting?<br>Is it safe for them?<br>Do they exchange their labor for a living wage?<br>Does the extraction damage where they live?|What's the relationship between raw material and design labor|Is this out-sourced?<br>Can you track the out sourcing?|Who can afford to use this?<br>Are the users aware of the people who make it?<br>|What are the working conditions of the people who dispose of the items?|
**Is the Labour unionised?**|<input type="checkbox" id="extraction" name="unionised">|<input type="checkbox" id="extraction" name="unionised" checked>|<input type="checkbox" id="extraction" name="unionised">|<input type="checkbox" id="extraction" name="unionised">|<input type="checkbox" id="extraction" name="unionised">
